---
title: "ALPCAH : Sample-wise Heteroscedastic PCA w/ Tail Singular Value Regularization"
collection: publications
permalink: /publication/2023-07-10-alpcah
excerpt: 'This paper is about the number 1. The number 2 is left for future work.'
date: 2023-07-10
venue: 'Sampling Theory and Applications'
paperurl: 'http://javiersc1.github.io/files/paper_alpcah.pdf'
citation: 'Your Name, You. (2009). &quot;Paper Title Number 1.&quot; <i>Journal 1</i>. 1(1).'
---
Principal component analysis (PCA) is a key tool in the field of data dimensionality reduction
that is useful for various data science problems.
However, many applications involve heterogeneous data that varies in quality
due to noise characteristics associated with different sources of the data.
Methods that deal with this mixed dataset are known as heteroscedastic methods.
Current methods like HePPCAT make Gaussian assumptions of the basis coefficients that may not hold in practice.
Other methods such as Weighted PCA (WPCA) assume the noise variances are known,
which may be difficult to know in practice.
This paper develops a PCA method that can estimate the sample-wise noise variances
and use this information in the model
to improve the estimate of the subspace basis associated with the low-rank structure of the data.
This is done without distributional assumptions of the low-rank component
and without assuming the noise variances are known.
Simulations show the effectiveness of accounting for such heteroscedasticity in the data,
the benefits of using such a method with all of the data versus retaining only good data,
and comparisons against other PCA methods established in the literature
like PCA, Robust PCA (RPCA), and HePPCAT.

[Download paper here](http://javiersc.github.io/files/paper_alpcah.pdf)

[1]J. A. S. Cavazos, J. A. Fessler, and L. Balzano, “Sample-wise Heteroscedastic PCA with Tail Singular Value Regularization,” 2023. [Online]. Available: https://openreview.net/forum?id=hocMFgyxrCD
